One of the simplest kinds of
supervised models are linear models.
A linear model expresses the target output
value in terms of a sum of weighted input
variables.
For example, our goal may be to
predict the market value of a house,
its expected sales price in
the next month, for example.
Suppose we're given two input variables,
how much tax the properties assessed each
year by the local government, and
the age of the house in years.
You can imagine that these two features of
the house would each have some information
that's helpful in predicting
the market price.
Because in most places, there's a positive
correlation between the tax assessment on
a house and its market value.
Indeed the tax assessment is often
partly based on market prices from
previous years.
And may be a negative correlation between
its age in years and the market value, so
older houses may need more repairs and
upgrading, for example.
One linear model, which I have made up as
an example, could compute the expected
market price in US dollars by starting
with a constant term, here 212,000.
And then adding some number, let's say 109
times the value of tax paid last year,
and then subtracting 2,000 times
the age of the house in years.
So for example this linear model would
estimate the market price of a house where
the taxes estimate was $10,000 and
that was 75 years old as
about $1.2 million.
Now, I just made up this particular
linear model myself as an example but
in general when we talk about
training a linear model.
We mean estimating values for
the parameters of the model, or
coefficients of the model
as we sometimes call them,
which are here the constant value
212,000 and the weights 109 and 20.
In such a way that the resulting
predictions for the outcome variable
Yprice, for different houses are a good
fit to the data from actual past sales.
We'll discuss what good fit means shortly.
Predicting house price is an example of
a regression task using a linear model
called, not surprisingly,
linear regression.
More generally,
in a linear regression model,
there may be multiple input variables, or
features, which we'll denote x0, x1, etc.
Each feature, xi,
has a corresponding weight, wi.
The predicted output,
which we denote y hat,
is a weighted sum of features
plus a constant term b hat.
I've put a hat over all
the quantities here that are estimated
during the regression training process.
The w hat and b hat values which
we call the train parameters or
coefficients are estimated
from training data.
And y hat is estimated from the linear
function of input feature values and
the train parameters.
For example, in the simple housing
price example we just saw,
w0 hat was 109, x0 represented tax paid,
w1 hat was negative 20
x1 was house age and
b hat was 212,000.
We called these wi values model
coefficients or sometimes future weights,
and b hat is called the bias term or
the intercept of the model.
Here's an example of a linear regression
model with just one input variable or
feature x0 on a simple
artificial example dataset.
The blue cloud of points represents
a training set of x0, y pairs.
In this case, the formula for predicting
the output y hat is just w0 hat times
x0 + b hat, which you might recognize as
the familiar slope intercept formula for
a straight line, where w0 hat is
the slope, and b hat is the y intercept.
The grand red lines represent different
possible linear regression models that
could attempt to explain
the relationship between x0 and y.
You can see that some lines
are a better fit than others.
The better fitting models capture the
approximately linear relationship where
as x0 increases,
y also increases in a linear fashion.
The red line seemed specially good.
Intuitively, there are not as many blue
training points that are very far above or
very far below the red
linear model prediction.
Let's take a look at a very simple form
of linear regression model that just has
one input variable, or
feature to use for prediction.
In this case, we have the vector
x just has a single component,
we'll call it x0,
that's the input variable, input feature.
And, in this case because there's just
one variable, the predicted output is
simply the product of the weight
w0 with the input variable
x0 plus a biased term b.
So x0 is the value that's provided,
it comes with the data and so
the parameters we have to
estimate are w0 and b,
in order to obtain the parameters for
this linear regression model.
So this formula may look familiar,
it's the formula for
a line in terms of its slope.
In this case,
slope corresponds to the weight, w0, and
b corresponds to the y intercept,
we call the bias term.
So here,
the job of the model is to take as input.
Let's pick a point here, on the x-axis so
w0 corresponds to
the slope of this line and
b corresponds to the y
intercept of the line.
And so finding these two parameters,
these two parameters together define
a straight line in this feature space.
Now the important thing to remember
is that there's a training phase and
a prediction phase.
So the training phase,
using the training data,
is what we'll use to estimate w0 and b.
So widely used method for estimating w and
b for linear aggression problems is called
least-squares linear regression,
also known as ordinary least-squares.
Least-squares linear regression
finds the line through this cloud of
points that minimizes what is called
the means squared error of the model.
The mean squared error of the model
is essentially the sum of the squared
differences between
the predicted target value and
the actual target value for
all the points in the training set.
This plot illustrates what that means.
The blue points represent points in the
training set, the red line here represents
the least-squares models that was found
through these cloud of training points.
And these black lines show
the difference between the y
value that was predicted for
training point based on it's x position,
and the actual y value
of the training point.
So for example here,
this point let's say has
an x value of- 1.75.
And if we plug it into the formula for
this linear model,
we get a prediction here,
at this point on the line,
which is somewhere around let's say 60.
But the actual observed value
in the training set for
this point was maybe closer to 10.
So, in this case, for this particular
point, the squared difference between
the predicted target and the actual
target would be (60- 10) squared.
So, we can do this calculation for every
one of the points in the training set.
We can compute this
squared difference between
the y value we observe in the training set
for a point, and the y value that would be
predicted by the linear model,
given that training points x value.
So each of these can be computed as
the square difference can be computed, and
then if we add all these up, And
divide by the number of training points,
take the average, that will be
the mean squared error of the model.
So the technique of least-squares,
is designed to find the slope,
the w value, and
the b value of the y intercept,
that minimize
this squared error,
this mean squared error.
One thing to note about this
linear regression model is
that there are no parameters to
control the model complexity.
No matter what the value of w and b,
the result is always going
to be a straight line.
This is both a strength and a weakness
of the model as we'll see later.
When you have a moment, compare this
simple linear model to the more complex
regression model learned with K nearest
neighbors regression on the same dataset.
You can see that linear models
make a strong prior assumption
about the relationship between
the input x and output y.
Linear models may seem simplistic, but for
data with many features linear models can
be very effective and generalize well
to new data beyond the training set.
Now the question is, how exactly do
we estimate the near models w and
b parameters so the model is a good fit?
Well, the w and b parameters
are estimated using the training data.
And there are lots of different
methods for estimating w and
b depending on the criteria you'd like
to use for the definition of what a good
fit to the training data is and
how you want to control model complexity.
For linear models,
model complexity is based on the nature
of the weights w on the input features.
Simpler linear models have a weight
vector w that's closer to zero,
i.e., where more features are either not
used at all that have zero weight or
have less influence on the outcome,
a very small weight.
Typically, given possible settings for
the model parameters,
the learning algorithm predicts the target
value for each training example, and
then computes what is called a loss
function for each training example.
That's a penalty value for
incorrect predictions.
The prediction's incorrect when
the predicted target value is different
than the actual target
value in the training set.
For example, a squared loss function
would return the squared difference
between the target value and
the actual value as the penalty.
The learning algorithm then computes or
searches for the set of w, b parameters
that minimize the total of this loss
function over all training points.
The most popular way to estimate w and
b parameters is using what's called
least-squares linear regression or
ordinary least-squares.
Least-squares finds the values of w and
b that minimize the total
sum of squared differences
between the predicted y value and
the actual y value in the training set.
Or equivalently it minimizes
the mean squared error of the model.
Least-squares is based on the squared
loss function mentioned before.
This is illustrated graphically here,
where I've zoomed in on the left lower
portion of this simple regression dataset.
The red line represents
the least-squares solution for w and
b through the training data.
And the vertical lines represent
the difference between the actual y
value of a training point, xi, y and
it's predicted y value given xi which
lies on the red line where x equals xi.
Adding up all the squared values of these
differences for all the training points
gives the total squared error and this is
what the least-square solution minimizes.
Here, there are no parameters
to control model complexity.
The linear model always uses
all of the input variables and
always is represented by a straight line.
Another name for this quantity
is the residual sum of squares.
The actual target value is given in yi and
the predicted y hat value for
the same training example is given
by the right side of the formula
using the linear model with
that parameters w and b.
Let's look at how to implement
this in Scikit-Learn.
Linear regression in Scikit-Learn is
implemented by the linear regression class
in the sklearn.linear_model module.
As we did with other
estimators in Scikit-Learn,
like the nearest neighbors classifier,
and the regression models,
we use the train test split
function on the original data set.
And then create and fit the linear
regression object using the training
data in X_train and the corresponding
training data target values in Y_train.
Here, note that we're
doing the creation and
fitting of the linear
regression object in one line
by chaining the fit method with
the constructor for the new object.
The linear regression fit method acts
to estimate the future weights w, which
are called the coefficients of the model
and it stores this in the coeff_attribute.
And the bias term, b, which is
stored in the intercept_ attribute.
Note that if a Scikit-Learn object
attribute ends with an underscore,
this means that these attributes were
derived from training data, and not, say,
quantities that were set by the user.
If we dump the coef_ and intercept_
attributes for this simple example,
we see that because there's only
one input feature variable,
there's only one element in
the coeff_list, the value 45.7.
The intercept attribute has
a value of about 148.4.
And we can see that indeed these
correspond to the red line shown in
the plot which has a slope of 45.7 and
y intercept of about 148.4.
Here is the same code in the notebook.
With additional code to score the quality
of the regression model, in the same way
that we did for K nearest neighbors
regression using the R-squared metric.
And here is the notebook code we use to
plot the least-squares linear solution for
this dataset.
Now that we have seen both K
nearest neighbors regression and
least-squares regression, it's interesting
now to compare the least-squared
linear regression results with
the K nearest neighbors result.
Here we can see how these two
regression methods represent
two complementary types
of supervised learning.
The K nearest neighbor regresser
doesn't make a lot of assumptions about
the structure of the data, and
gives potentially accurate but sometimes
unstable predictions that are sensitive
to small changes in the training data.
So it has a correspondingly higher
training set, R-squared score,
compared to least-squares
linear regression.
K-NN achieves an R-squared
score of 0.72 and
least-squares achieves an R-squared
of 0.679 on the training set.
On the other hand, linear models make
strong assumptions about the structure of
the data, in other words,
that the target value
can be predicted using a weighted
sum of the input variables.
And linear models give stable but
potentially inaccurate predictions.
However, in this case, it turns out
that the linear model strong assumption
that there's a linear relationship
between the input and
output variables happens to be
a good fit for this dataset.
And so it's better at more accurately
predicting the y value for
new x values that weren't
seen during training.
And we can see that the linear model
gets a slightly better test set
score of 0.492 versus 0.471 for
K nearest neighbors.
And this indicates its ability
to better generalize and
capture this global linear trend.